@S1@
Welcome. We're going to design a notification system the way an architect would explain it to a student — starting from requirements, moving through high level and low level design, into the database, and finally into scaling and interview traps. This system sends email, SMS, push, and in-app messages, at a scale of over one million notifications per minute.
@S2@
First, the functional requirements. We need multi-channel delivery across email, SMS, push, and in-app. We need reusable templates with placeholders like name and order id. We need per-user preferences, so a user can turn off promotional email but keep transactional alerts on. And we need both immediate and scheduled delivery, bulk campaigns, retries, and reporting.
@S3@
Now the non-functional requirements. Scale is one million-plus notifications per minute. On the CAP theorem, we deliberately choose availability over strict consistency — it's fine if the delivered status is a little stale, but it's never fine to silently drop a notification. Latency targets differ by type: OTP must land under ten seconds, order confirmations in five to ten seconds, and promotional messages can wait thirty minutes.
@S4@
Here are the seven core entities. User and Client hold device tokens and identity. NotificationPreferences store per-channel and per-type opt-ins. NotificationContent, or Notifications, is the main job record. Template holds versioned, reusable message content. DeliveryStatus tracks per-channel outcomes. And Notifications Outbox is the reliability entity — it's written in the same transaction as the notification, and that's the key to never losing a message.
@S5@
This is the full entity relationship diagram. A User has one set of NotificationPreferences. A Notification references a user and a template, and fans out into one row per channel in DeliveryStatus. Critically, Notifications and Notifications Outbox are written together — that pairing is what guarantees reliability, and we'll explain exactly why in a moment.
@S6@
The API surface is simple by design. POST /api/v1/notifications accepts a template id, recipient, variables, channels, and an optional priority or scheduled time. GET /status returns delivery state. Template management supports create, list, and versioned reads. And PUT /preferences lets a user update their channel and type opt-ins, which also invalidates the cache and publishes an event.
@S7@
This is the full high-level design. Clients call an API Gateway, which routes to the Template, User Preference, and Notification services. The Notification service validates everything and writes to Postgres atomically — the notification and its outbox row together. A CDC publisher polls that outbox and pushes events into Kafka, organized into priority lanes. Delivery workers per channel then call SendGrid, Twilio, or FCM and APNS, and provider webhooks report back the final outcome.
@S8@
Let's break down what each service actually does. The API Gateway handles auth, rate limiting, and routing. The Template service manages versioned templates cached in Redis with a ninety-five percent hit rate. The User Preference service manages opt-ins, also cached, and publishes a Kafka event whenever preferences change so the cache stays fresh. The Notification service is the core orchestrator: it validates, renders, and writes atomically. And delivery consumers, scaled independently per priority, do the actual sending.
@S9@
Now let's trace a real request. Amazon calls our API with a template id and variables. The gateway checks the JWT and rate limit. The Notification service fetches the template — usually from Redis, a cache hit. It validates that all required variables were supplied. It reads the user's preferences, also from cache, and filters out any channel the user has turned off. Then it renders the final subject and body, and generates a notification id.
@S10@
Here's the single most important reliability pattern in this whole design: the transactional outbox. Without it, if we insert the notification row and then separately publish to Kafka, a crash between those two steps silently loses the message forever — no error, nothing in Kafka, the user just never gets their email. The fix is to insert the notification and an outbox row in the very same database transaction. A background CDC publisher then polls for unpublished outbox rows and keeps retrying until Kafka confirms receipt. If the commit succeeded, the message will eventually go out — guaranteed.
@S11@
Once published, events land in one of several Kafka topics, chosen by priority and channel — critical for OTP and fraud alerts, standard for orders, promotional for marketing, and bulk for campaigns, plus dedicated retry and dead-letter topics. This separation is why an OTP is never stuck waiting behind ten thousand marketing emails — it has its own topic and its own pool of dedicated consumer workers.
@S12@
A consumer picks up a message and does three things before calling any provider. First, an idempotency check — has this notification already been sent on this channel? If yes, skip it, because Kafka can redeliver messages. Second, a rate limit check using a Redis token bucket, so we never exceed what SendGrid or Twilio allow per second. Third, it routes to the correct provider adapter for that channel.
@S13@
For email, the worker calls SendGrid or Amazon SES. The provider returns a 202 Accepted immediately — but that only means it was queued, not delivered. We record that as status SENT along with the provider's message id. Real delivery confirmation — delivered, opened, clicked, or bounced — arrives later via a webhook, which we match back to our record using that provider message id.
@S14@
SMS works the same way through Twilio, with mandatory compliance text like "reply STOP to unsubscribe." Push is more interesting: a user can have several device tokens — Android, iOS, and web — so we fan out to FCM for Android and web, and APNS for iOS, in parallel. If a provider says the token is invalid or the app was uninstalled, we remove that token immediately and never retry it.
@S15@
OTP gets a dedicated fast path. We generate a short code, store only its hash in Redis with a five-minute expiry, and publish straight to the critical SMS topic — bypassing the normal rate limiter entirely, because a user is actively waiting at the login screen. The target is under ten seconds end to end, and this dedicated lane is what makes that possible even during a marketing campaign backlog.
@S16@
Failures are not all equal. A timeout or a provider overload is temporary — we retry with exponential backoff, waiting one minute, then five, then fifteen. A bounced email or an invalid phone number is permanent — retrying wastes quota and can get our domain blacklisted, so we mark it failed immediately. After the retry budget is exhausted, the message goes to a dead-letter queue where operations can investigate instead of it silently vanishing.
@S17@
Here's the database schema for the two most important tables. Notifications stores the job itself — user, template, channel, status, and priority — with indexes tuned for the two access patterns that matter most: fetching a user's recent notifications, and finding scheduled ones that are now due. Notifications Outbox stores the unpublished event, and the CDC publisher's whole job is polling this table for rows where published equals false.
@S18@
Templates use a composite primary key of template id and version, because we never edit a template in place — we insert a new version instead. That gives us an audit trail, safe A/B testing, and instant rollback. User Preferences stores channel and type opt-ins per user per client, because the same person might have different preferences with Amazon versus Uber.
@S19@
DeliveryStatus is the per-channel, per-attempt outcome table — one notification can have several delivery status rows, one per channel and one per device for push. And here are the four Redis key patterns that make this whole system fast: preference cache for twenty-four hours, template cache for one hour, rate-limit token buckets, and OTP codes with a five-minute expiry.
@S20@
For resilience, every provider has a fallback and a circuit breaker: SendGrid falls back to Amazon SES, Twilio falls back to MSG91. If failures exceed fifty percent, the breaker opens and routes all traffic to the backup, then periodically tests if the primary has recovered. Template immutability gives us the same kind of safety net — a bad template version can be deactivated and rolled back instantly.
@S21@
At scale, the notifications table is partitioned by month, so queries hit small, fast partitions and old data can be archived to cheap storage. Bulk campaigns use batch inserts and the provider's bulk API instead of one call per recipient, turning fifty API calls a second into fifty thousand emails a second. And Kafka consumers autoscale based on consumer lag — when the lag crosses a threshold, Kubernetes just adds more worker pods.
@S22@
Scheduled notifications are stored in Postgres with a future timestamp rather than sitting in Kafka for hours — a scheduler polls for due records once a minute and only then publishes them. Provider webhooks are processed asynchronously too: we return 200 OK immediately and batch-update a hundred delivery records at once, instead of doing a database write per webhook, which would be far too slow under load.
@S23@
This is the question interviewers always ask: how do you guarantee no notification is ever lost? The answer has five parts. The outbox pattern makes the database write and the outbox write atomic. A CDC publisher guarantees at-least-once delivery to Kafka. Idempotent consumers, checking delivery status before sending, prevent duplicates from that at-least-once guarantee. Put together, the system behaves as exactly-once from the user's point of view, even though internally it's at-least-once plus deduplication.
@S24@
The second classic question: how do you rate limit at over a million notifications a minute? We use a Redis token bucket per provider, implemented as an atomic Lua script so it's thread-safe. When tokens run out, the consumer just waits and Kafka absorbs the backpressure — nothing is lost, it just queues. We combine that with multi-provider failover, bulk batching to multiply effective throughput, and a bypass for OTP so critical traffic never waits on the limiter.
@S25@
Let's walk the complete flow end to end with state transitions. A request comes in, gets validated, and the notification is written as PENDING alongside its outbox row in one transaction. The CDC publisher picks it up and pushes it to Kafka. A consumer checks idempotency and rate limits, then calls the provider, moving status to SENT. Minutes later, a webhook arrives and moves it to DELIVERED. If a call fails temporarily, it retries and stays SENT; if retries run out, it moves to FAILED and lands in the DLQ.
@S26@
A few things interviewers are specifically listening for: always mention the outbox pattern by name, always connect at-least-once delivery with idempotent consumers, always describe the priority queue structure, always mention the token bucket rate limiter with real provider numbers, and never forget to check user preferences before sending — that's both a reliability concern and a legal one.
@S27@
Here is the full list of twelve scaling techniques used across this design: transactional outbox, prioritized Kafka topics, token bucket rate limiting, template and preference caching, provider failover, idempotent consumers, database partitioning, batched bulk sends, Kafka autoscaling, asynchronous webhook processing, and real-time plus batch reporting. Each one solves one specific bottleneck — that's the pattern to remember.
@S28@
This single diagram is the whole system on one page — clients through the gateway, into the three core services, atomic writes into Postgres, the CDC publisher into Kafka's seven topics, delivery consumers per channel and priority, out to the real providers, webhooks back into reporting, and Redis threaded through preferences, templates, rate limits, and OTPs. If you can redraw this from memory, you understand the design.
@S29@
This is the architect's cheatsheet — the numbers worth memorizing. OTP under ten seconds. SendGrid at fifty emails a second, Twilio at one hundred SMS a second, FCM at ten thousand pushes a second. Preference cache for twenty-four hours, template cache for one hour, OTP for five minutes. Retry backoff at one, five, and fifteen minutes, then dead-letter after three attempts. These numbers show up constantly in interview follow-up questions.
@S30@
That completes the architect-level design — functional and non-functional requirements, the full entity model, API design, high and low level design, the outbox pattern, Kafka topics, database schema, Redis usage, rate limiting, provider failover, template versioning, partitioning, and autoscaling. This is everything a senior or staff engineer is expected to cover.
@S31@
Here's how to open an interview on this topic. Frame the problem before drawing anything: a notification system is infrastructure, like an internal version of AWS SNS with your company's business logic built in. State the three hard problems up front — never losing a message at scale, getting OTP under ten seconds, and avoiding duplicates — then draw the simplest possible box diagram before expanding it layer by layer.
@S32@
Now the "why" behind every major decision. Why not call SendGrid directly from the Order service? Because a provider outage would then fail the order itself, and you'd have no way to prioritize OTP over a newsletter. Why Kafka instead of a database queue? Replay, scale beyond ten thousand messages a second, and true priority isolation. Why the outbox pattern instead of just writing to the database then Kafka? Because that naive approach has a crash window where a message is silently lost forever.
@S33@
Interviewers love to probe deeper after each diagram. After the architecture diagram: why not use AWS SNS directly — because it has no template management, preference checks, or priority queues built in. After the ER diagram: why JSONB for payload — because email, SMS, and push all have very different shapes, and a rigid table would be full of nulls. After the API design: why an idempotency key — because network retries from the caller must never create duplicate notifications.
@S34@
This sequence diagram shows one order confirmation email traveling through every hop — from the Order service, through the gateway, into the Notification service which checks the cache, renders the template, and writes the outbox transaction, then the CDC publisher moves it to Kafka, the email consumer checks idempotency and rate limits before calling SendGrid, and finally a webhook arrives minutes later to mark it delivered. OTP takes a shortcut straight to the critical SMS topic with no rate limiting.
@S35@
Every notification moves through a clear state machine: PENDING, then SENT once a provider accepts it, then either DELIVERED via webhook, FAILED permanently for things like a bounced email, or RETRYING for temporary failures like a timeout, which eventually lands in the dead-letter queue after three attempts. Classifying the failure type correctly is what decides whether we retry or give up immediately.
@S36@
In production, the API contract carries more than the basics — a client-supplied idempotency key to make retries safe, a pinned template version for A/B testing, and per-channel status in the response, because email and push for the same notification can have completely different outcomes. There's also a dedicated bulk campaign endpoint, and preferences support a do-not-disturb window with an explicit timezone, because you should never assume UTC for a user's quiet hours.
@S37@
This trade-off table is worth memorizing because interviewers ask "why not X" constantly. Kafka over RabbitMQ for replay and scale. At-least-once plus idempotency over Kafka exact-once transactions, because exact-once carries a real throughput penalty. Database plus Redis for templates over a CDN, because sub-millisecond access matters more than serving large binaries. Circuit breaker over simple round robin, because it isolates failures faster.
@S38@
Kafka versus RabbitMQ, concretely. Kafka is log-based with durable retention, so a crashed consumer can rewind and replay — perfect for a Zomato-scale system sending millions of orders where a forty-minute outage shouldn't lose anything. RabbitMQ deletes messages on acknowledgment, has no native replay, but is operationally simpler — a fine choice for a small internal system sending a few thousand notifications a month.
@S39@
For providers: SendGrid gives you rich analytics and built-in template tools, while Amazon SES is the cheapest option per email and fits naturally if you're already on AWS — many production setups use both, SendGrid as primary and SES as fallback. For SMS, Twilio has the best global coverage and documentation, while MSG91 is far cheaper for India-only traffic and has built-in TRAI DND compliance.
@S40@
For push, FCM and APNS are not interchangeable — FCM covers Android and web, APNS covers iOS exclusively, so any cross-platform app needs to integrate both. Both have hard rate limits, both use a priority flag to control urgency, and both will tell you when a token is dead — an invalid token or a 410 Gone response means the app was uninstalled, and you should remove that token immediately rather than ever retrying it.
@S41@
Here's a senior-level trap question: exactly how many places can a duplicate come from? There are four. The CDC publisher can crash after publishing to Kafka but before marking itself done, and republish on restart. A consumer can crash after calling the provider but before committing its Kafka offset. Our own retry of an API call can hit the provider twice. And the provider's own webhook can fire more than once. Each has its own safeguard, and together they make user-visible duplicates effectively impossible.
@S42@
Another trap: a user unsubscribes at nine a.m. and still gets a promotional email one minute later. The root cause is a stale Redis cache that wasn't invalidated when the database was updated. The fix has three layers — invalidate the cache immediately on write, also propagate the change asynchronously through a Kafka event, and for anything as legally sensitive as unsubscribes, add a fresh database check at send time rather than trusting the cache at all.
@S43@
What happens when a consumer group comes back online after two hours of downtime and finds a million backlogged messages? The rate limiter is already the natural safety net — it caps throughput regardless of how many workers just started. On top of that, you'd stagger pod startup, and — this is the senior-level insight — you'd check for staleness: a two-hour-old flash-sale email is often worse to send late than not to send at all, so you cancel it instead of burning provider quota on it.
@S44@
At one million notifications a minute, does the database become the bottleneck? Doing the math: two writes per notification means over thirty thousand writes a second to Postgres, which is right at the edge of what a well-tuned instance can handle. The fixes are connection pooling, batching the outbox publisher's updates, database partitioning by month, and — the senior insight — realizing that promotional traffic has a thirty-minute SLA, so you can smooth a million messages over half an hour instead of forcing them through in one minute.
@S45@
A user with ten devices — several Android, several iOS, several browsers — needs ten parallel API calls and ten separate delivery status rows for a single notification. Dead tokens get removed the moment a provider reports them invalid. And the senior answer goes further: not every notification type should fan out to all ten devices — a security alert should, but a routine "new message" ping should probably only wake the most recently active device.
@S46@
Compliance is not optional at this scale. GDPR requires that we never store raw personal data — only an external user id the client maps themselves — so erasure is a simple delete. CAN-SPAM requires an unsubscribe link in every commercial email, auto-injected so no team can forget it. TCPA requires prior consent for marketing SMS and immediate honoring of STOP replies — a single mistake here can cost hundreds of dollars per message at a user base of millions.
@S47@
Good architecture evolves in stages rather than being over-built from day one. A ten-thousand-user startup can call SendGrid directly with no Kafka at all. At a million users you add Kafka, Redis caching, retries, and the outbox pattern — that's the design we've walked through today. At a hundred million users you add prioritized topics, autoscaling, and database partitioning. At a billion users you shard the database, move to Cassandra for delivery status, and geo-distribute by region for data residency. Each stage should be an addition, never a rewrite.
@S48@
Two classic scaling scenarios. On Black Friday, traffic jumps ten times in ninety seconds — the fix is pre-scaling infrastructure the night before, letting Kafka's consumer autoscaler add workers as lag rises, and smoothing promotional sends over their thirty-minute SLA instead of forcing them all through instantly. During an OTP login storm, half a million simultaneous logins can exceed a single phone number's rate limit — the fix is pre-provisioning a pool of phone numbers and round-robining across them, kept completely isolated on the critical topic from any marketing backlog.
@S49@
A rapid round of trap questions senior candidates get asked: does your retry topic need its own priority so OTP failures don't wait behind everything else — yes. How do you avoid serving a stale template after an update — you don't need to, because versioning means the cache key itself changes. Why not WebSockets for every channel — because a user must be actively connected, which only works for the in-app bell icon, not for offline delivery. What if Postgres itself goes down during Black Friday — you fail closed, return an error, and lean on proper connection pooling and database high availability to make that rare.
@S50@
To close an interview strong: state clearly that the design guarantees at-least-once delivery through the outbox pattern, no duplicates through idempotent consumers, sub-ten-second OTP through dedicated priority lanes, and horizontal scalability at every layer, with provider rate limits as the only real ceiling — one we handle with multi-provider routing. That's the complete architect-level notification system, from requirements to a billion users.
